[Music]
you know there's one unique place on our
planet where there are no hordes of
tourists no traffic jams and no
high-rise buildings this place is one of
the hardest to reach and it's almost
impossible to survive there if you're
unprepared right I'm talking about my
backyard crazy oh yeah and also there's
Antarctica the home of bizarre findings
and even more mysterious phenomena one
of them is the deafening roar that's
heard from the frozen terrain every
night accompanied by enigmatic ice
quakes mmm something very strange
happens in the coldest place on earth
and this something makes the frozen
Valleys of Antarctica shake up to
several hundred times a night but while
this experience might terrify even the
most experienced observer all the
strangeness as a perfectly scientific
explanation recently researchers from
the University of Chicago have been
studying the coldest continent with the
help of a vast network of seismometers
spread all over the Antarctic Ice Sheet
that's when they first observed a
curious thing every night the ice came
alive causing thousands of tiny one
second long ice quakes these ice quakes
happen even in the most remote locations
where there hadn't been any seismic
activity before it puzzled the
scientists to no end
after all while ice quakes weren't
something out of the ordinary the fact
that they happened at night was
anomalous which here means deviating
from what is standard normal or accepted
another addition to your growing
vocabulary courtesy of the bright side
but eventually the researchers found the
answer to this enigma and just like many
other worrying natural processes
nowadays the nightly ice quakes seem to
relate to the recent climate changes in
particular with melting polar ice caps
warmer temperatures leave us with ponds
of melted water with a layer of ice on
top when it gets colder at night the ice
layer contracts
and the water underneath this ice starts
to freeze as a result of this process
the volume of the water becomes bigger
the pressure accumulates until at one
moment wham bam the ice cover breaks
with a loud snap and there it is a tiny
ice quick this process would resemble a
volcano eruption but for the small scale
an ice instead of lava scientists think
that the ice quakes that keeps shaking
glaciers are yet another example of how
much stress our planet experiences
because of the changing climate but if
you're still not convinced how about
this in 2014 scientists who were
monitoring the Ross Ice Shelf in West
Antarctica recorded a blood-curdling
acoustic oddity with the help of
super-sensitive seismic sensors and by
the way all those s sounds strung
together are called alliteration oops
off the tracks again anyway they managed
to capture a soundscape that could
belong to any haunted house sound track
this spooky melody was just a reflection
of how Antarctica's ice was changing
under the influence of global warming
the sound was coming from seismic waves
that were rippling through the ice shelf
the top several feet of loose ice and
snow called fern are extremely
vulnerable to what's happening on the
surface be it changes in temperature or
wind direction for example the
researchers noticed that the ice tune
was different after storms blew through
but every time afterward the melody
returned to normal that is until a warm
spell hit in January 2016 that's when
the pitch of the ice tune dropped the
reason for that was the melting of top
layers of ice and snow which slowed down
seismic waves coming through the fern
but that wasn't the worst about the
unusual warm January weather researchers
were shocked to find out that even after
the temperatures had returned to the
average January norm and we can only
guess that this norm is nothing short of
freezing the pitch of the tune didn't
become higher again it could only mean
one thing
that changes in the fern were permanent
or at least semi-permanent is it a big
deal I'm afraid so
when the fern melts it not only makes
the Ice Shelf unstable but also speeds
up the streaming of ice into the ocean
this problem is especially acute in West
Antarctica where warm ocean currents
undercut floating ice shelves if the
worst happens this region can cause sea
levels to rise by more than ten feet so
even without the accompanying horror
movie soundtrack the process is
occurring in Antarctica are already
frightening enough however ice quakes
and mysterious tones aren't the only
puzzles scientists have managed to crack
it started in the early 1970s when
satellites were just beginning to take
photos of Earth in one of the images
researchers spotted a huge enigmatic
hole piercing one of the seasonal ice
packs floating in the lhasa of sea in
Antarctica when summer came the gap
disappeared leaving more questions than
answers only to reappear almost a half a
century later in 2017 then in winter
when ice is supposed to be at its
thickest a monstrous 3,700 square mile
hole unexpectedly showed up at the very
same ice pack and as if that wasn't
enough just two months after that the
gap grew a staggering 740 percent larger
when it got warmer the hole vanished
without a trace
once again but this time scientists had
an idea of what this phenomenon might be
it turned out that such short lasting
gaps could be scars left by cyclonic
storms and indeed in September 2017 cold
and warm air masses collided over the
South Pole
it caused powerful winds swirling inward
and reaching a speed of 72 miles per
hour as well as towering fifty two foot
tall waves these forces toss the ice
pack around eventually creating a
bizarre-looking hole but scientists are
sure that despite how threatening and
dramatic such a gap may look it often
plays a crucial role for wildlife
survival connecting the ocean and the
sky it creates a habitat for photo
plankton and convenient pathways for
animals like penguins and seals on the
other hand huge gaps in ice packs
indicate climate changes and can
influence the climate themselves not
only regionally but globally as well for
one they change the oceans movements
what's more they create so-to-say
windows through which tons of energy
leaked from the ocean into the
atmosphere adding to global warming and
that's the most disturbing thing about
ice pack gaps the warmer the climate on
earth becomes the more cyclones rage at
the Earth's poles and therefore more and
more climate changing gaps appear in ice
packs looks like a vicious cycle to may
this problem becomes even more urgent as
soon as you get to know that under
Antarctica's ice cover there are sources
of incredible heat the thing is that in
particular areas the crust both under
East Antarctica and West Antarctica
isn't thick enough to protect ice sheets
from the heat of the magma which is
bubbling below the surface no one knows
why the underground heat is especially
intense in such hot spots but it's a
fact that this heat can lead to the
warming of the ocean and melting of ice
by the way a 25 year long survey has
also shown that nowadays Antarctica's
ice is disappearing at an alarming speed
during more than two decades the
continent has lost a whopping three
trillion tons of ice approximately one
third of this ice vanished in July 2017
when a monstrosity of an iceberg with an
area of 2,000 square miles broke
from the Larsen Sea ice shelf it weighed
more than one trillion tons and was the
most massive iceberg ever recorded the
rest of the ice has been steadily
melting and flowing into the ocean and
this process has been accelerating over
the past several years in any case not
all the mysteries of Antarctica have
been solved yet for example scientists
still can't explain the origin of
high-energy particles literally
streaming from the continents ice these
particles keep shooting up from the
ground and head away into open space
however there's a theory that could
probably explain this phenomenon some
researchers are sure that the particles
are cosmic rays that come from space
blasts through our planet and come out
from the other side now this idea has
one serious drawback the cosmic
particles people know about shouldn't be
able to pass through earth without
crashing into something and
disintegrating that's why the unusual
behavior of Antarctica's particles has
remained unexplained so far so how about
you would you like to travel to
Antarctica solve some of its enigmas and
maybe meet a penguin if so let me know
down in the comments if you learned
something new today or increase your
vocabulary then give this video a like
and share with a friend but hey don't go
out to have lunch with an Antarctic
penguin just yet we have over 2,000 cool
videos for you to check out all you have
to do is pick the left or right video
click on it and enjoy and remember stay
on the bright side of life